Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to look at a very classical theorem from ancient
Greek geometry called Heron's formula and when
it connected to this triple quad formula that we
established last time which I'm trying to
convince you is one of the most important
formulas in mathematics along the way we're going
to talk about a nice relation called Archimedes
function like we're going to atribute some of
these ideas back to our communities okay so
the context that we've been talking about is that
of one-dimensional affine geometry a very simple
situation where a point is just represented by
a rational number enclosed in square brackets
we introduce the idea of a quadrants between two
such points if we have the point 2 and the point
5 then the quadrants between them is 5 minus 2 all
squared would be 3 squared or 9 so it's the square
of the traditional distance and we're trying to
convince you that having this purely algebraic
point of view not involving any absolute values or
square roots is preferable ok so if we have three
points on the line say a 1 a 2 a 3 in some order
or another we can define three quadrants --is q1
the quadrants between a2 and a3 q2 the quadrants
between a1 a3 and q3 of the quadrants between a1
and a2 and then the second most important theorem
in mathematics I claim is the triple quad formula
which establishes the relationship between these
three quadrants --is determined by three collinear
points and this is the relation Q 1 plus Q 2
plus Q 3 all squared is twice Q 1 squared plus
Q 2 squared plus Q 3 squared and this motivates
us to introduce what we might call Archimedes
function which is the following expression
called a of q1 q2 q3 so by definition it's
the difference between the left and the right
hand sides of the triple quad formula and we
saw that a little bit of algebraic manipulation
allows us to rewrite this in a asymmetrical but
somewhat simpler fashion as for q1 q2 minus q1
plus q2 minus q3 all squared and this was one of
three possible different asymmetrical rewritings
could have also said for q1 q3 minus q1 plus Q 3
minus q2 all squared or for q2 q3 minus q2 plus
q3 minus q1 all squared so that's we're going to
call Archimedes function and it's of course
intimately connected with this triple quad
formula all right so here is a very algebraic fact
an arithmetic 'el theorem that gives us another
reason for appreciating the importance of this
triple quad formula so the theorem is that if d1
plus d2 equals d3 and you can think of these are
just being numbers rational numbers and we define
q1 to be the square of D 1 q2 to be the square
of D 2 and q3 to be the square of D 3 then the
relationship between the three squares q1 q2 and
q3 is that they satisfy the triple quad formula
namely a of q1 q2 q3 is 0 so this is telling us
how to go from a linear relationship between three
numbers to a well a quadratic relationship
between the squares of those three numbers
in fact in that previous video when I asked you to
essentially derive the triple quad formula those
of you who did do that exercise and I hope it
was many of you will very likely have found this
argument that basically we start with a relation
like this and then we transform it to see what
the relationship is between the squares and along
the way we've discovered the triple quad formula
so let's see how that goes so suppose that D
1 plus D 2 equals D 3 we want a relationship
between the squares so it makes sense to square
both sides of this equation D 1 plus D 2 squared
the square of the left-hand side what does that
give us well by the binomial theorem the square
of D 1 is Q 1 that's what we're assuming and
then we have twice the product and then the
square of the second term is Q 2 all right so
that's the square of the left-hand side here
and the square of the right-hand side will be Q
3 so this linear relationship is now transformed
into this relationship between Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 and
still D 1 D 2 we'd like to get rid of the D 1
D 2 and just have a relationship involving Q 1
Q 2 and Q 3 only how are we gonna do that well
a little bit of algebraic manipulation what
I'm going to do is we're going to bring all
the Q's to one side and all the DS to the other
side I don't want to square things together all
right so we take Q 1 plus Q 2 we subtract Q 3 so
there's the left-hand side now we bring this to
D 1 D 2 to the right-hand side so we have minus
2 D 1 D 2 and now we square both sides to get Q
1 plus Q 2 minus Q 3 squared equals the square
of this which is 4 Q 1 Q 2 but that's exactly
the triple quad formula in that asymmetric form
so a of q1 q2 q3 equals zero I remind you that
another form for a of q1 q2 q3 is for q1 q2
minus q1 plus q2 minus q3 all squared so this
implies this this is a purely algebraic in fact
an arithmetic --all result that's intrinsically
independent of geometry even though it's
motivated from geometry it's telling us
how to go from a linear relationship between
three things to a quadratic relation between
the squares of those three things and the triple
quad formula naturally occurs here it's a very
fundamental the kind of thing so it's a very good
example of useful algebra so if your high school
math teacher you're doing some algebra getting
your students to do some algebraic manipulation
this is a great kind of direction for them to
experiment in something actually interesting and
useful involving some algebraic manipulations all
right now I want to introduce to you an algebraic
variant of that previous theorem lovely identity
which we are going to call Archimedes formula now
did Archimedes know this formula well I'm not
sure my motivation for calling it Archimedes
formula is that we'll see that this is intimately
connected with the classical result called Heron's
formula in geometry and it's known through Arab
sources not directly but only indirectly that
Archimedes knew Heron's formula roughly 200
years before Heron did so we don't know what
Archimedes understanding is a lot of the works
of Archimedes have been lost or only partially
known to us so I'm going to take the license of
naming this result in honor of Archimedes in my
view Archimedes does not have enough formulas and
theorems named after him so we're gonna remedy
the situation just a little bit today okay so what
is this lovely theorem it's again pure arithmetic
or pure algebra yeah so suppose we have various
quantities D 1 D 2 D 3 and Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 suppose
that Q 1 is d 1 squared Q 2 is d 2 squared and Q 3
equals D 3 squared just as before then Archimedes
function of Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 can be re-written in
terms of the DS in the following way as a product
of four terms D 1 plus D 2 plus D 3 D 1 plus D 2
minus D 3 D 2 plus T 3 minus D 1 and D 3 plus D
1 minus D 2 this is a purely algebraic result it
sort of in the direction of our previous one all
right so again some very nice practice for your
algebraic skills here all right so let's start
well what is the definition of this a of Q 1 Q
2 Q 3 well let's use the asymmetrical form that
we found useful for Q 1 Q 2 minus Q 1 plus Q 2
minus Q 3 all squared all right so let's replace
the Q's with the various expressions involving DS
so we have 4 D 1 squared times D 2 squared minus
D 1 squared plus D 2 squared minus D 3 squared
all squared what do we notice about this well
we notice it's a difference of squares because
this is now a square this is also obviously a
square because it's something squared so we can
write a squared minus B squared as a minus B
times a plus B we can automatically factor this
difference of squares and it is 2 D 1 D 2 minus
this D one squared plus D 2 squared minus D 3
squared times the same expression 2 D 1 D 2 and
now plus D 1 squared plus D 2 squared minus D 3
squared now let's have a look at this first term
we can rewrite that the D 3 squared is appearing
with a minus sign here and a minus sign here for
a total of a plus sign so let's bring it out front
and then what's left is a minus D 1 squared minus
D 2 squared plus 2 D 1 D 2 that's minus quantity
D 1 minus D 2 all squared in a similar kind of
way when we look at this we can combine the
D 1 square the D 2 squared and the 2 D 1 D 2
to be D 1 plus D 2 all squared and left over we
have a minus D 3 squared now we've written each
of these to be themselves differences of squares
here we recognize another difference of squares
this squared minus this squared similarly here
that's this squared minus the squared so again
we use the same factoring of a squared minus B
squared as a minus B times a plus B so we have
D 3 minus all of this so minus D 1 plus D 2 times
D 3 plus all of this in other words plus D 1 minus
D 2 now we have D 1 plus D 2 minus D 3 over here
and then D 1 plus D 2 plus T 3 so we factored the
original thing into a product of four factors
and then if we compare that with the original
statement there's the corresponding term there
this term here corresponds to that one this one
corresponds to D 2 plus T 3 minus D 1 this first
one here and this one is d 3 plus D 1 minus D 2 so
the theorem and proof here are taken from my
book divine proportions it's 0:29 on page 70
so notice that this algebraic identity now
incorporates the previous theorem because
suppose that we know that D 1 plus D 2 equals D
3 well in that case this term will be 0 so this
entire product will be 0 and that will imply that
a of Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 is 0 so now we see something a
little bit more it's not just D 1 plus D 2 equals
D 3 that makes this expression 0 but also D 2 plus
D 3 equals D 1 would also make it 0 or D 3 plus
D 1 equals D 2 would make it 0 well in fact also
D 1 plus D 2 plus D 3 equals 0 would imply that
a is 0 there's a very nice identity which is not
really novel I mean this kind of identity has
been written down many many times in different
contexts okay but we're establishing it here in
the context of this language we're giving it a
name identifying it as something rather special
and interesting deserves to have a separate place
and acknowledgement of it Archimedes formula
we'll call it there are a few exercises for
you to practice your algebraic skills in relation
to the triple quad formula there are also taken
from my book all right so the first one asks you
to show that as a quadratic equation in say Q 3
the triple quad formula can be re-written in this
way we can just rewrite it so that it looks like
a quadratic equation in Q 3 Q 3 squared minus
2 Q 1 plus Q 2 times Q 3 plus Q 1 minus Q 2
all squared equals 0 so if we're trying to solve
for Q 3 say in terms of Q 1 and Q 2 and we know
that they satisfy the triple quad formula relation
then this is the quadratic equation that we have
to solve and here's another exercise show that if
we have these two quadratic equations X minus p1
squared equals Q 1 and X minus p2 squared equals Q
2 and P 1 P 2 Q 1 and Q 2 are just some arbitrary
numbers so if we have two quadratic equations it
can be interesting for us to ask when is there a
common solution what is our common solution when
is there an X that satisfies both equations in
your exercise is to show that they have a common
solution precisely when these four numbers that
are involved here give us a solution to Archimedes
formula namely if a of Q 1 Q 2 and P 1 minus P 2
squared equals 0 another appearance of the triple
quad formula in the context of solving a pair of
quadratic equations alright so now we come to a
very famous result from classical Greek geometry
it's called Heron's formula it's named after
Heron or hero of Alexandria who derived the
result sometime around 60 BC in a book called
metric ax it's a formula for the area of a
triangle given the three side lengths so if you
know the three side lengths of the triangle what
is its area it's a very practically important
problem and not surprisingly this is a very
celebrated theorem that used to be a mainstay of
all geometry courses and in fact until relatively
recently all mathematics students would have
learnt Heron's formula part of their education
here's the formula the area of a triangle with
side lengths a beating see is there's a formula
area is the square root of s times s minus a times
s minus B times s minus C where this quantity s is
a plus B plus C over two sometimes called the semi
perimeter of the triangle the perimeter would be a
plus B plus C so this is half of the perimeter
notice that there is some quotes here usually
you don't find quotes okay but for us we have
to put quotes because we're working completely
rationally because we don't feel like doing an
infinite number of operations and this square
root unfortunately is really asking us in general
to do an infinite number of operations finding
a square root is a process that goes on forever
and forever and forever and doesn't end okay so
it's problematic for us with our logical rational
completely clear point of view towards mathematics
all right so we address this but let's just carry
on with the traditional way of thinking about
this all right so here's an example suppose that a
triangle has side lengths say four five and seven
okay then the semi-perimeter would be four plus
five plus seven over two that's 16 over 2 that
would be 8 and so Heron's formula would say that
the area is square root of there's the S which is
8 and then s minus a that's 8 minus 4 times s
minus B that's 8 minus 5 times s minus C or 8
minus 7 so inside the square root we have an 8 we
have a floor we have a 3 and we have a 1 so for a
total of well there's a 4 here there's a 4 here we
could pull that outside the square root to give us
4 and what's it left inside is 2 times 3 or square
root of 6 okay so the answer will be the area of
this triangle is four times the square root of
six and again we're going to put this in quotes
because for us with a rational point of view that
square root of six represents only an applied or
approximate quantity there is no real square root
of six this is some kind of statement about some
truncation of some process well that's a classical
example of how Heron's formula would be used to
calculate the area of a particular triangle if you
know its side lengths let's have a look at another
example of an application of Heron's formula this
time to a triangle whose vertices are specified
to us in cartesian geometry so we have a triangle
with vertices a 0 0 B 2 3 right there and C for
1 over here all right so according to Pythagoras
theorem and the standard thinking the lengths of
the sides of this triangle are okay so what's the
length here well I remind you that calculate that
in traditional sense what you do is you think of
this right triangle okay so there's a difference
between two in the x-coordinate this difference
in two in the y-coordinate so this triangle this
right triangle here has sides two and two so
Pythagoras theorem has it's usually expressed it
would be that two squared plus two squared equals
a squared tells us that a squared is 8 and a would
be the square root of eight so if you believe in
lengths if you believe in the irrational numbers
if you believe in being able to take square roots
you would say yes this is a length and that length
has value square root of eight I hope by now
you're living more suspicious about these kinds
of statements that you're starting to recognize
that there's something highly problematic about
such a statement that it's assuming that there's
a notion of length of a segment to begin with that
there's an assumption that there's a context of
real numbers in which this length has a value and
there's an assumption that the infinite amount of
work required to actually calculate this square
root of eight in the real numbers is this is
an infinity that we've actually completed and
we finished and there is the answer all right so
let's carry on with the thinking and let's have a
look at the other two side lengths in quotes this
be here well it's the hypotenuse of a triangle
with sides four and one so it's length will be
square root of 17 and again that should also be
taken with a grain of salt now what about see this
length here well there's two here in three years
so two squared is four three squared is nine so
we're talking about the square root of thirteen
so if we believe in doing an infinite amount of
work then we can look at these things and say ah
we found the three lengths of this triangle okay
what does Heron's formula tell us well tells us
the area of the triangle must then be the square
root of okay first thing is the semi-perimeter
so rude eighth plus root 17 plus root 13 over 2
that's the s quantity and now we take s minus a
so if we take this thing here and we subtract
a here there's a root 8 over 2 if we subtract
root 8 from that we get minus root 8 over 2 so
we're going to get an expression that looks a
lot like this one except that will be a minus sign
where there was a plus sign here and when we take
s minus B we'll get an expression that looks
much the same but with a minus sign in front of
the square root of 17 and s minus C will give us
this expression with a minus sign in front of the
square root of 13 okay and now our Witek with real
numbers comes to our aid and we supposedly make
this calculation we add these three irrational
numbers and divide by to form that irrational
number we form that irrational number we form that
irrational number so each one of these operations
requires an infinite amount of work a what's an
infinite amount of work between friends okay and
then once we've done that infinite amount of work
we multiply this irrational by this irrational by
this irrational by this irrational another couple
of infinite amounts of work great and then we take
the square root of all of that we apply Babylonian
method or Newton's method or something perform yet
another infinite amount of work and we get the
square root well that's all in fact just talking
isn't it what actually happens is that we get
our calculator and press a few buttons and our
calculator is not doing an infinite amount of work
it's just doing a finite amount of work it's just
truncating up to ten decimal places or whatever
and ignoring the rest and it will spit out some
value and you can try it and you will find that
your calculator spits out the value five point
zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero up to
a certain amount and then it stops and so in
fact there is some ambiguity we of course we don't
know how it continues but this certainly strongly
suggests that the answer might actually be five
it sort of makes us scratch our heads some kind
of coincidence happening here how come all these
irrationalities that we have floating around here
in Heron's formula somehow magically seem to be
cancelling themselves out or disappearing to give
us this nice seemingly rational even integral
value well it's not really a surprise when we
look at it from the point of view of the geometry
and the original question because remember when
we were talking about the area back in math
foundations 33 we discussed exactly what the
area of a triangle like this should be and how we
should compute it now we found that we could view
that completely arithmetic alee and rationally
for example we could think about a rectangle
that encloses the triangle and we could compute
the area of that rectangle say not before times 3
that be 12 and then we could subtract the area of
this thing which would be 4 times 1/2 that's 2 we
take the area here which is 3 times 2 divided
by 2 that's 3 and the area this one here well
that's 2 times 2 divided by 2 so that's another 2
so when you start with 12 and we subtract 2 and we
subtract 2 and we subtract 3 so it's all together
we're subtracting 7 so yes we should get 5 we can
see that geometrically the area is 5 and Heron's
formula is somehow using a lot of irrationalities
which magically kind of cancel themselves out
some mysterious fashion to get that same rational
answer even though it's not clear that it's
rational from the heron's formula Heron's formula
doesn't immediately suggest to us that this is
actually a rational number from linear algebra
there's another way of thinking about this area
we have two vectors vector for 1 a vector to 3 in
linear algebra we learned that to find the area
of a triangle we take a determinant determinate
there's a little 2 by 2 matrix which is 4 times 3
minus 1 times 2 let me divide it by 2 and we get
5 this formula in not exactly this form but in the
equivalent form of ad minus BC we established also
in this math foundations 33 lecture if you'd like
to have a look at it so there's something curious
going on something that needs explaining why is
it that in this context the irrationalities of
Heron's formula somehow magically disappear it's
suggesting that we don't really understand what's
going on that perhaps Heron's formula is not
entirely the right way of thinking about this
particular situation that turns out to be exactly
the case so to understand what's really going on
with Heron's formula and how we really ought
to think about this fundamental theorem let's
go to planar geometry and establish just a few
notions basic notions about measurement in the
plane alright so suppose we have two two points a
1 which is a 1 B 1 and a 2 which is a 2 B 2 these
are now points in the plane rather than points on
a line we can define the quadrants between these
two points in a very analogous fashion to what
we did in the one-dimensional case we can take
the difference between the x coordinates in the
first coordinates a 2 minus a 1 and we can square
that now we could take the difference between
the Y coordinates or the second coordinates B
2 minus B 1 and we can square that and we can add
those two squared quantities and we can call that
Q of a 1 a 2 now that's sort of familiar from
Pythagoras theorem ok that's sort of one step
in finding the traditional distance between a 1
and a 2 this quantity is a purely algebraic and
symmetric quantity there's no absolute values
involved even better there is no square roots
involved just addition multiplication and
subtraction and it's symmetric if you need
to change a 1 a 2 this quantity does not change
now in standard modern mathematics you don't even
learn this definition of quadrants the notion
is not even defined it's absolutely incredible
ok instead what one does is one defines the
corresponding irrational quantity obtained by
taking the square root of this quadrants so you
will all know that the distance between a 1 and
a 2 he is defined to be the square root of the
quadrants well actually it's usually not defined
this way it's usually defined in this formula
that we take a 2 minus a 1 squared plus B 2 minus
B 1 squared we take the square root of that and
when I say we take ok this means very liberally
we take we perform some thought experiment that
involves performing this infinite operation to
the very end and then we take that big result of
that completed infinite operation and there it
is that's called the distance between a 1 a 2 and
this is considered a fundamental notion in modern
geometry even though itself evidently involves an
infinite amount of work and in any particular case
it can only be exhibited approximately in general
unless you choose your triangle very carefully
ironically what we're calling the quadrants is
often called the squared distance so a modern
mathematics logic is so impoverished right that
the absurdity of taking a quantity finding its
square root and then referring to the original
quantity as the square of the square root he is
not widely appreciated people do not roll their
eyes at the mention of the squared distance
even though they probably should this is almost
absurd this is the fundamental algebraic notion
this is some perverted transcendental infinite
version of it it may very well be useful in
applied mathematics sure but what we really mean
is that approximations to it are a useful applied
mathematics but in pure mathematics this is a
highly dubious notion even this definition is
highly dubious all right so now we have this
notion of quadrants and now let's have a look
at Heron's formula from a different perspective
very exciting we're now moving towards a much
better formulation of Heron's formula first
of all we have to admit what actually is the
problem with the logical weaknesses in Heron's
formula it relies on a theory of real numbers
because square roots are involved it relies on a
theory of lengths which four general segments is
problematic also because of the need for square
roots for triangles in the rational plane the
irrationalities in Heron's formula are or appear
to be unnecessary and in fact also if you look at
proofs of Heron's formula they often involve other
transcendental circular functions like cosines and
sines and so on so the logical difficulties with
those things are also incorporated so by adopting
a logical or rational viewpoint we naturally ask
is there a better formulation if you have a real
number irrational numbers are okay kind of point
of view you don't ask to question this you just
say ok that's that's the way it is ok but if you
have a rational point of view then necessarily
you are going to be unhappy with anything that
involves square roots especially fundamental
formulas and you're naturally going to ask the
question can we do better can we move to a higher
level and see this formula in a better more
algebraic more general light so in fact we can
there is a better solution it's called Archimedes
theorem we're going to call it Archimedes theorem
it's more general it's more logical as more
algebraic and it's more computable so what is
this far superior form of Heron's formula which
we are now going to call Archimedes theorem in
honor of Archimedes who was really understanding
Heron's formula before anybody else but in work
that is lost to us ok so what is this formula
so here is the area of a planar triangle with
quadrants --is Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 he is given by
this expression sixteen times the area squared
is Archimedes function applied to q1 q2 and q3
so in other words it's the difference between
the left and the right hand sides of the triple
quad formula so we see that the one-dimensional
triple quad formula which originally started
as just a relationship between the quadrants
--is formed by three collinear points contains the
algebraic essence of a fundamental two-dimensional
result when we get to triangle in the plane this
same relation that occurred first in the one
dimensional case is exactly what we require to get
at the area well actually to get at the square of
the area and there happens to be some constant
16 here which is sort of an accident of the
normalizations that we've chosen so this is a very
interesting point okay and I think it opens up all
kinds of possibilities that a situation in one
dimension somehow points the way leads us to the
right notions to understand something fundamental
in a higher dimension namely in two dimensions
it's a very interesting possibility that maybe we
can discover lots of things in higher dimensions
by understanding what's happening in lower
dimensions well enough okay we're gonna see
this is a very nice insight so now let me show
you how to go from Heron's formula will transform
that to derive Archimedes theorem going from
something irrational to something rational here
is Heron's formula again the area of a triangle
is the square root of s times s minus D 1 times
s minus D 2 times s minus D 3 where D 1 D 2 and D
3 are the side lengths of the triangle and where
s the semi-perimeter is d 1 plus B 2 plus B 3
all over 2 so we're going to take this formula
and we're going to rewrite it first of all we're
going to square both sides so the area squared is
now just the product of these four terms is no
more square root now s is just d1 plus d2 plus
d3 over 2 what about s minus d1 well if we take
this thing here and we subtract d1 then we get D
2 plus d3 minus D 1 over 2 which well write this
way we've seen this kind of thing before in that
example that I did explicitly when I take s minus
d2 I'm taking this nut subtracting d2 the effect
is that that tough sign there changes to a minus
sign now when I take s minus d3 I get D 1 plus T
2 minus T 3 okay so the two times two times two
times two gives us a 16 and the product of these
four terms that's exactly Archimedes function
of q1 q2 q3 where q1 q2 and q3 are the squares
of D 1 D 2 D 3 respectively that was exactly
that we called Archimedes formula the fact that
this particular product equals this Archimedes
function of the squares of the D 1 D 2 D 3 so
it's almost an immediate consequence of Archimedes
formula the fact that 16 times the area squared is
a of Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 so we see that Archimedes
theorem is a rational form of Heron's formula
now this is in my view not an adequate proof
of Archimedes theorem because I don't accept
the validity of Heron's formula in the first place
because I don't believe in those irrationalities
upon which it depends so ultimately we're going to
have to have a separate completely rational proof
of Archimedes theorem at this point I just want
to clear if I to you that it's the triple quad
formula which is ultimately really responsible
for giving us something like Heron's formula which
namely the improved version of Archimedes theorem
16 times the square of the area of a triangle is
given by the Archimedes function of q1 q2 q3 and
I remind you that this a is q1 plus q2 plus q3
all squared minus 2 times Q 1 squared plus Q 2
squared plus Q 3 squared so let's see how this
improved rational form allows us to reconsider
the examples that we looked at earlier so let's
have a look at this triangle with side lengths 4
5 & 7 that we looked at previously the associated
quadrants --is will be the square 16 25 and 49 so
according to Archimedes theorem 16 times the area
squared is a of 1625 49 and that's 4 times 16
times 25 minus 16 plus 25 minus 49 all squared
all right the 4 times 25 is a hundred so we get
1600 there - here we have 41 - 49 so it's minus
8 all squared same as 8 squared and then that's
1600 minus 64 so 1500 and 36 and if we divide
by 16 then we find that the area squared is 96 I
remind you that the area was then the square root
of this which was 4 times square root of 6 we see
also that really rationally it's the square of the
area that is more natural than the area itself
when you have a triangle given in terms of side
lengths the other example that we looked at was
a particular triangle ABC with a being the point
zero zero B and the point two three and see the
point four one quadrants is of that triangle were
817 and 13 so the lengths or the distances of the
triangle where the square roots of those things
here we're just dealing with the sums of squares
without taking the square roots vastly simpler so
according to Archimedes theorem 16 times the area
squared is a of 8 1713 and just doing a slight
variant on what we did before I'm going to choose
8 and 13 as sort of the pair that we're going to
bring together so it's 4 times 8 times 13 minus 8
plus 13 minus 17 all squared all right so this is
32 times 13 here we have 21 minus 17 so that's a 4
squared or 16 we divide by 16 then we get that the
area is squared is 8 divided by 16 that becomes a
2 so 2 times 13 is 26 16 divided by 16 is 1 so we
get 25 and finally the area equals 5 now we are
not surprised that something rational it should
be something rational because we're starting with
points with integral or rational entries in the
plane so the area should be rational and we've
completely avoided any irrationalities we see
now that that whole story with taking all those
square roots and taking all those distances and
making all those irrational calculations that
in fact we can't actually do having to resort
to a calculator to spit out eight or 10 decimal
places it's all something of a red herring it
all represents a misunderstanding of the essential
nature of what's going on the essential nature is
completely algebraic and contained essentially
in this Archimedes formula which is really
essentially the manifestation of the triple quad
formula very important inside so this is this
is rational mathematics all right so much to be
thought about in this lecture Heron's formula has
been a mainstay of geometry for thousands of years
it's something that students all used to learn
we can now see that they probably weren't looking
at it the right way the manipulations behind what
I've been doing here are not unfamiliar they are
not original we can see them in various forms in
many many places so in some sense many many people
have rediscovered over the years the time to be
central algebraic aspect of what's underlying why
we're talking about here I guess the novelty here
is to put things in center stage to give things
proper names and to identify clearly that this is
really the right way of thinking that the square
root business represents a misunderstanding of
what's going on okay so this is a very profitable
way of thinking next time we're to carry on and
look at some other aspects of how the triple
quad formula and variants of it extensions of
it connect with classical geometry when we go
back to the ancient Indians and one of the most
remarkable results of ancient India Brahma Gupta's
formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral I'm
going to see that that too is curiously and
intricately connected with one dimensional
fine geometry I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you